Statements
==========

If statements
-------------

If statements use a similar style to most programming languages and will execute their asigned code if the test placed inside returns the boolean value true. If I wanted to have something occur if, and only if, our previous ``ReturnTrueOrFalse`` function returned true, then you can use:

.. code-block:: javascript

  if( ReturnTrueOrFalse() )

Conditional operators can also be used to make comparisons, such as ``==`` (equals), ``<`` (less than), ``<=`` (less than or equal), ``!=`` (not equal), etc., returning true if their condition is satisfied. For example, to execute code if a dice roll landed on 5:

.. code-block:: javascript

  if( RandomInt( 6 ) + 1 == 5 )

Like other languages, if statements can be connected to ``else if`` and ``else`` statements. ``else if`` statements must be used immediately after an ``if`` or ``else if`` and will only check their condition if the preceding statements failed. ``else`` statements behave similarly, but always run if the preceding statements failed and must be last.

Squirrel supports ternary operations like most languages. The value of the expression depends if a condition is truthy or not. However, if not used carefully this can worsen readability.
The Syntax is ``condition ? if_condition_true : if_condition_false``. This is especially useful when declaring variables or passing parameters.

.. code-block:: javascript

  // shortenedUsername is "longus..."" if username is "longusername" or "short" if username is "short"
  string shortenedUsername = username.len() > 9 ? username.slice(0,6) + "..." : username;

Loops
-----

Loops are used to execute the same code n times.

While Loops
~~~~~~~~~~~

A while loop runs as long as the condition evaluates to a truthy value.

.. code-block:: javascript

  while( true )
  {
    // this will result in an endless loop because the probe condition will never be false 
  }

  while( RandomInt( 2 ) )
  {
    // This will run until a 1 is generated by chance, because squirrel treats 0 as a falsy value and 1 as truthy.
  }

Do While Loop
~~~~

A do while loop is the same as a while loop but the condition is checked **after** the body is executed.

.. code-block:: javascript

  do
  {
    // this will execute only one time
  } while( false )

For Loop
~~~~~~~~

A for loop also runs until a condition is met however it provides you with a counter variable.

The Syntax is as follows: ``for( int counter; condition; behaviour_after_body_execution )``

.. code-block:: javascript

  // prints 0, 1, 2, 3, 4
  for( int i; i < 5; i++ )
  {
    print( i )
  }

  array<int> arr = [ 14, 2, 18, 9 ]
  // prints 14, 2, 18, 9
  for( int i; i < arr.len() * 2; i += 2 )
  {
    print( arr[i] )
  }

Foreach Loop
~~~~~~~~~~~~

A foreach loop iterates over a ``table`` or an ``array`` and executes for each entry. The loop provides you with an optional counter for arrays or key for tables.

.. code-block:: javascript

  array<int> arr = [ 1, 2, 3, 4 ]
  table<string, string> map = {
    key1 = "mapped value 1",
    key2 = "mapped value 2"
  }

  // prints 0 1, 1 2, 2 3, 3 4
  foreach( int index, int value in arr )
  {
    printt( index, value )
  }

  // prints key1 mapped value 1, key2 mapped value 2
  foreach( string key, string value in map )
  {
    printt( key, value )
  }

Implicit conditional behavior
-----------------------------
Conditional statements, such as while loops and if statements, also implictly cast non-boolean inputs to booleans. For numbers, this means 0 is considered false and anything else is considered true. For instance variables like arrays and entities, ``null`` is considered false and anything else is considered true. For example, these inputs are considered true by the if statements:

.. code-block:: javascript

  if(2)

.. code-block:: javascript

  array somelist = [0, 1]
  if(somelist)

Be aware that empty arrays and strings, ``[]`` and ``""``, are considered true by this logic.

Formatting of actions
---------------------
So great, we can loop and check things, but what can we do with this information? Squirrel uses ``{}`` to denote the contents of a series of actions caused by such a statement.

For example, lets make our ``ReturnTrueOrFalse`` function, that randomly picks either true or false, first:

.. code-block:: javascript

  bool function ReturnTrueOrFalse() {
    return RandomInt(2) == 1
  }

Note that while functions always need ``{}``, single-line ``if``/``else`` statements and loops do not:


.. code-block:: javascript

  if(ReturnTrueOrFalse())
    printt("Only called if true")

Now let's make a more complicated function that will use the previous script to determine true or false, printing a list each time it returns true:

.. code-block:: javascript

  array<int> someinformation = [1,2,3,4,5,6]
  void function ThisDoesStuff(){
    while(ReturnTrueOrFalse()){
      foreach( int information in someinformation){
        printt(information)
      }
    }
  }

